“Eleni Toumbakari was a philosophy student and active in the resistance. She wasn't afraid and she was like a mother to us,” says Veta Mioni as she lays out a collection of photographs – some grainy – on her living room coffee table.

On the occasion of Holocaust Remembrance Day on January 27, Kathimerini met up with Veta and her sisters Pavlina and Rina, who are twins, so they could tell us their story. On the table that sits between us, they have a framed photograph of their parents and a blue pin with the words “We Remember.”

Their father, Sabetai (Sabi) Cohen, was a bank worker who then went into trade, representing French thread maker DMC with a store on Valaoritou Street in the northern port city of Thessaloniki. As was the custom at the time, his family arranged his marriage to Germaine Matalon. The twins were born at the family home in 1937, delivered by their obstetrician-gynecologist grandfather Moishe Matalon, and Veta came two-and-a-half years later.

They don't remember much from the early years of the Greek-Italian war other than that their mother knitted socks for the Greek soldiers on the Albanian front and always made sure to keep food in stock.
“The fear started when the Germans entered Thessaloniki. They came down Vardari and along Tsimiski, where we lived. All the shops had closed their shutters,” remembers Pavlina Matathia.

The twins were 6 when the Nazis started targeting the city's Jews, forcing them to pin a gold star to their clothes, confiscating their assets and handing over their businesses to sequestrators, pushing them out of their homes and moving them into ghettos. The older sisters remember there never being enough food and their parents being frightened, while also feeling a sense of something threatening themselves.

Then one day their father and an uncle were arrested for no apparent reason. The family paid for their release in what was a usual form of blackmail at that time, which was before the first death trains left Thessaloniki for the Nazi concentration camps.
Thanks to connections made at work (and, the three sisters suspect, after money changed hands), their father and grandfather managed to secretly get the family out of the ghetto and onto a fishing boat bound for Evia from Michaniona. For the time being at least, they were out of danger. According to data for that time, more than 45,000 Thessaloniki Jews, or 95 percent of the city's Jewish population, had been sent to the Auschwitz-Birkenau death camp by August 1943.

Matathia remembers her father's dejected figure during the overnight journey to Evia. “That may be the only clear image I have of him,” she says. “He was leaving behind so many relatives and this weighed very heavily on him. He fled because his father-in-law convinced him to. I remember him sitting in the boat with a woolen cap on his head, smoking. It was an image of absolute sadness. This is something he carried around for the rest of his life.”